h1(#title). Marrow Render

bq(subtitle). A universal templating engine and serialization API.

bq(byline). (C) 2009-2011, Alice Bevan-McGregor and contributors.

bq(byline). "https://github.com/marrow/marrow.templating":github-project

[github-project]https://github.com/marrow/marrow.templating



h2(#what-is). %1.% What is Marrow Render?



h3(#goals). %1.1.% Goals




h2(#installation). %2.% Installation

Installing @marrow.templating@ is easy, just execute the following in a terminal: [2]

<pre><code>pip install marrow.templating</code></pre>

If you add @marrow.templating@ to the @install_requires@ argument of the call to @setup()@ in your application's @setup.py@ file, @marrow.templating@ will be automatically installed and made available when your own application is installed.  We recommend using "less than" version numbers to ensure there are no unintentional side-effects when updating.  Use @"marrow.templating<1.1"@ to get all bugfixes for the current release, and @"marrow.templating<2.0"@ to get bugfixes and feature updates, but ensure that large breaking changes are ignored.


h3(#install-dev). %2.1.% Development Version

Development takes place on "GitHub":github in the "marrow.templating":github-project project.  Issue tracking, documentation, and downloads are provided there.

Installing the current development version requires "Git":git, a distributed source code management system.  If you have Git, you can run the following to download and _link_ the development version into your Python runtime:

<pre><code>git clone https://github.com/marrow/marrow.templating.git
(cd marrow.mailer; python setup.py develop)</code></pre>

You can upgrade to the latest version at any time:

<pre><code>(cd marrow.templating; git pull; python setup.py develop)</code></pre>

If you would like to make changes and contribute them back to the project, fork the GitHub project, make your changes, and submit a pull request.  This process is beyond the scope of this documentation; for more information, see "GitHub's documentation":github-help.


[github]https://github.com/
[git]http://git-scm.com/
[github-help]http://help.github.com/



h2(#basic). %3.% Basic Usage



h2(#extending). %7.% Extending Marrow Render

Marrow Render can be extended by the creation of additional templating engine and serialization adapters.  The API for each is quite simple.


h2(#license). %8.% License

Marrow Render has been released under the MIT Open Source license.


h3(#license-mit). %8.1.% The MIT License

Copyright (C) 2009-2011 Alice Bevan-McGregor and contributors.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.



fn1. In order to run the full test suite you need to install "pymta":http://www.schwarz.eu/opensource/projects/pymta/ and its dependencies.

fn2. If "Pip":http://www.pip-installer.org/ is not available for you, you can use @easy_install@ instead. We have much love for Pip and "Distribute":http://packages.python.org/distribute/, though.




---



<dl><dt><h1>à la carte</h1><p>|ˌä lä ˈkärt; lə|</p></dt><dd>A common templating and serialization interface for Python, esp. web applications.</dd><ol><li>adjective<dd>(of a menu or restaurant) listing or serving food that can be ordered as separate items, rather than part of a set meal.</dd><dd>(of food) available on such a menu.</dd></li><li>adverb<dd>as separately priced items from a menu, not as part of a set meal <i>: wine and good food served à la carte.</i></dd></li></ol></dl>

The core of the API is for the generation of content from a named template, ostensibly on-disk though some engines support passing in strings instead of paths. Evaluated templates are returned as a 2-tuple of @(None or str(content_type), unicode(content))@, making _à la carte_ very useful for re-use in web frameworks.


h2. Background

There are a wide variety of templating languages available.  In fact, Python seems to collect them.  In general, there is no unified or consistent way to utilize these templating languages.  Due to the learning curve, developers become hesitant to switch from one language to another.  Many templating languages are also poorly documented.

An attempt was made by the TurboGears project to create a unified API called "Buffet":http://projects.dowski.com/projects/buffet, used primarily by the CherryPy application server, though in some cases this API is more difficult to use than the raw template language.  Other frameworks (like Pylons) utilize small helper functions, but require that the framework be updated to extend support to new templating engines.

The onus for ease of deployment should be on the templating engine creator, not the framework creator or front-end web developer.


h2. Conventions Used in this Document

This document will be written similar to an RFC.  The following is copied, with modification, from "RFC 2119":http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt, for no other reason than that was the first result in the web search.

# The word *must*, or the terms *required* or *shall*, mean that the definition is an absolute requirement of the specification.
# The phrase *must not*, or the phrase *shall not*, mean that the definition is an absolute prohibition of the specification.
# The word *should*, or the adjective *recommended*, mean that there may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore a particular item, but the full implications must be understood and carefully weighed before choosing a different course.
# The phrase *should not*, or the phrase *not recommended* mean that there may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances when the particular behavior is acceptable or even useful, but the full implications should be understood and the case carefully weighed before implementing any behavior described with this label.
# The word *may*, or the adjective *optional*, mean that an item is truly optional.  One developer may choose to include the item because a particular task requires it or because the developer feels that it enhances an application while another vendor may omit the same item.

An implementation which does not include a particular option *must* be prepared to interoperate with another implementation which does include the option, though perhaps with reduced functionality. In the same vein an implementation which does include a particular option *must* be prepared to interoperate with another implementation which does not include the option (except, of course, for the feature the option provides.)


h2. Application Programming Interfaces

h3. Path Negotiation

Support for:

* @'engine:package.templates.foo'@ — implicit filename extension, with 'best guess' from a prioritized list of default engines
* @'engine:package.templates/foo.html'@ — explicit file path relative to package

Parts are optional; all of the following are legal:

* @'json:'@ — pure engine, usually a serializer or a template loaded from an existing string
* @'package.templates.foo'@ — defaulting the engine part, implicit filename extension
* @'package/templates/foo.html'@ — defaulting the engine, explicit file path
* @'/var/www/htdocs/index.html'@ — absolute path
* @'./views/edit.html'@ _or_ @'../../templates/master.html'@ — relative paths

Where the path is relative to is up to the framework making use of the template interface, though this defaults to the current working directory.


h3. Engine API

The registered renderer (engine) callable *must* accept the following named arguments. These arguments are referenced by name but *should* be defined in this order to allow for easy manual use.  Renderers *should* also accept an unlimited list of additional keyword arguments (which *may* be called @options@, as it is with the provided default engines), which are additional values that can be passed in from a combination of a stored configuration and call-time value.

There are several attributes of the engine that are used internally for specific purposes.  All of these attributes are *optional*, and will default to @None@ if not present.

* @mapping@ — a dictionary mapping extensions to content types

The argument specification is as follows, and *may* be implemented as either a class with a @__call__@ attribute or a simple function.

* @data@ — a value for use in the template (usually a dictionary)
* @template@ — an *optional* on-disk absolute path
* @**options@ — additional *optional* keyword arguments

The renderer *must* return a 2-tuple of:

* @None@ or @str@ — content type
* @unicode@ — content


h4. Engine Forms

An engine *may* be defined as a simple function. Simple functions *must not* store state between calls.  If your template engine needs to keep state (e.g. a cache) then you *must* implement your engine interface as a new-style class.  An example of a simple function:

<pre><code>def helloTemplate(data=dict(name='world'), template=None, **options):
    return 'text/plain', u"Hello %(name)s!" % data</code></pre>

If an engine is a new-style class (that does not subclass _à la carte's_ @Engine@ helper class) initial options are passed to the @__init__@ method (assigned previously to @Engines().options@) with render-time options passed to @__call__@.

If you wish to use the @Engine@ helper class you get template caching and automatic reloading of on-disk templates that are modified between calls.  There are two methods you *must* define in your subclass, and you can override @__init__@ to perform custom initialization, and @__call__@ to override the template generation.

* @prepare(filename, **options)@ — load and return a template object for the cache
* @render(template, data, **options)@ — render and return a finished template

An example of a light-weight wrapper for the Mako templating language is as follows:

<pre><code>class Mako(Engine):
    def load(self, filename, **options):
        return Template(filename=filename)
        
    def render(self, template, data, **options):
        return None, template.render_unicode(**data)</code></pre>
